---
layout: post
author: elias
title: Vim macros for the win!
---

I have been using [Vim](https://www.vim.org/) as a text editor for some time now and today I had a moment of delight when I finally started to understand its power. I managed to perform a tedious task effectively using Vim macros and registers!

I was writing a function in JavaScript to generate a D3 plot, following [Mike Bostock's recommendation](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/chart/) for reusable charts. The code was roughly at the following state:

```
function exampleGlyph() {

    // Glyph attributes
    let baseColor = "gray",
        lineHeight = 8,
        A = d => 0,
        B = d => 10,
        C = d => 20,
        D = d => 30,
        E = d => 40,
        F = d => 50,
        height = d => 10,
        color = d => "lightsteelblue"
    
    function chart(selection) {
        // ...
    }

    chart.baseColor = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return baseColor
        baseColor = value
        return chart
    }

    return chart
}
```

The important part is that there are several (ten) attributes at the beginning of the `exampleGlyph` function, describing various attributes of the chart, such as `baseColor` and `lineHeight`. To make them accessible from outside the function, we must create accessor functions, one for each attribute. The accessor function for the first atttibute, `baseColor`, has already been added towards the end of the function:

```
    chart.baseColor = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return baseColor
        baseColor = value
        return chart
    }
```

However, we need to create accessor functions for all ten attributes. In my previous attempts for other charts, I had just copied the accessor function for an attribute and manually replaced the name of the attribute (appearing in three places), with the name of the new attribute. This was a time consuming process.

Now I decided to use Vim macros to do this. I would perform the replacements once and then repeat the process for all attributes. This is how I proceeded.

First, I copied all attributes at the bottom of the function, above the accessor function.

```
    // ...

    let baseColor = "gray",
        lineHeight = 8,
        A = d => 0,
        B = d => 10,
        C = d => 20,
        D = d => 30,
        E = d => 40,
        F = d => 50,
        height = d => 10,
        color = d => "lightsteelblue"

    chart.baseColor = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return baseColor
        baseColor = value
        return chart
    }

    return chart
}
```

I then yanked the accessor function definition to the `t` register (`t` for "template"). This can be done by selecting it (and the following newline, for clarity) in visual mode and executing the following:

```
"ty
```

This yanked definition will work as a template for the other definitions. Then I moved the cursor to the beginning of the `lineHeight = 8,` line (i.e. at the `l` character), which, for the sake of this example, let's say that is in line 85. Then I started recording the macro, at register `a`:

```
qa
```

I then typed the sequence of commands that would take the word `lineHeight` and create a copy of the accessor function template, with the word `baseColor` replaced by `lineHeight`. This is the (very simple) sequence used:

```
"fywG3k"tp2wdw"fPj$bdw"fpj0wdw"fP85Gdd
```

Piece of cake. Then I pressed

```
q
```

to stop the recording. The macro was ready to use!

OK, let's see what this sequence means, piece by piece.

* **`"fyw`**: Yank a word in register `f` (`f` for "field"). This is the name of the attribute. We will use the `f` register whenever we need to paste it at the right position.
* **`G3k`**: Move to the end of the file and then three lines up, to go just above `return chart`, where we will put the next accessor function definition.
* **`"tp`**: Paste the contents of the `t` register, i.e. the accessor function template.
* **`2wdw`**: Move two words to the right, i.e. at the beginning of `baseColor`, and remove that word. This does not modify either of the `f` or `t` registers that we use.
* **`"fP`**: Paste the contents of the `f` register, i.e. the attribute name, before the cursor, i.e. right after the `.`.
* **`j$b`**: Move to the line below, to the end of the line and to the beginning of the last word, i.e. to the beginning of the next occurrence of `baseColor`.
* **`dw`**: Delete the `baseColor` word.
* **`"fp`**: Paste the contents of the `f` register, i.e. the attribute name, after the cursor, i.e. where `baseColor` was before.
* **`j0w`**: Move to the line below, to the beginning of the line and to the beginning of the first word, i.e. the final occurence of `baseColor`.
* **`dw`**: Delete the `baseColor` word.
* **`"fP`**: Paste again the attribute name before the cursor, i.e. where `baseColor` was before.
* **`85G`**: Move to the line containing `lineHeight = 8,` (the one that we copied, not the original at the beginning of the file).
* **`dd`**: Delete the line. Now line 85 contains the next attribute and the process is ready to start again.

This sequence may seem quite complex, but it actually consists of movements and actions that a regular Vim user performs all the time and they come up quite naturally. It is not optimized, as some operations may be done with less keystrokes, but this is what I came up with at the moment. The most important part is the use of a specific register for yanking the attribute name, so that it is not overridden by the deletions we make in the process.

After stopping the recording with `q`, as mentioned above, we can run again the macro by hitting the following:

```
@a
```

The cursor is already at the right position, so the macro will create a copy of the accessor function at the right place, replace all occurences of `baseColor` with the correct attribute name, and prepare for the next run. Subsequent runs can also be made with `@@`, for quicker typing.

After all accessor functions were inserted, the copied list of attribute names and values was already deleted, so the job was done! The result looked like this:

```
function exampleGlyph() {

    // Glyph attributes
    let baseColor = "gray",
        lineHeight = 8,
        A = d => 0,
        B = d => 10,
        C = d => 20,
        D = d => 30,
        E = d => 40,
        F = d => 50,
        height = d => 10,
        color = d => "lightsteelblue"

    function chart(selection) {
        // ...
    }

    chart.baseColor = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return baseColor;
        baseColor = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.lineHeight = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return lineHeight;
        lineHeight = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.rectHeight = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return rectHeight;
        rectHeight = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.A = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return A;
        A = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.B = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return B;
        B = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.C = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return C;
        C = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.D = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return D;
        D = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.E = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return E;
        E = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.F = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return F;
        F = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.height = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return height;
        height = value;
        return chart;
    }

    chart.color = function(value) {
        if (!arguments.length) return color;
        color = value;
        return chart;
    }

    return chart
}

```

Thanks for reading! I hope this helps you in your editing!

